doc: packages docs feedback (#35370)
nodejs/node: doc/api/packages.md

## Introduction

A package is a folder tree described by a `package.json` file. The package
consists of the folder containing the `package.json` file and all subfolders
until the next folder containing another `package.json` file, or a folder
named `node_modules`.

> This section provides guidance for package authors writing `package.json` files

Reviewer: When I read “section” I think the immediate section, like “Introduction” in this case; but what you really mean is the whole page, e.g. `packages.md`. Is there a better word to use?

Author: I guess we could just use page?

```suggestion
This page provides guidance for package authors writing `package.json` files
```

> A package is a folder described by a `package.json` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A package is a folder tree described by a `package.json` file. The package
consists of the folder containing the `package.json` file and all subfolders
until the next folder containing another `package.json` file, or a folder
named `node_modules`.
```

* Files ending in `.mjs`.

> * Files ending in `.js` when the package boundary `package.json` file contains a

Reviewer: I disagree with the term “package boundary.” That was discussed early on when the docs were originally written. The idea behind “scope” is that what we’ve created mirrors function scopes in JavaScript: one scope can be inside another. The “boundary” analogy lacks this concept. I think “boundary” makes the docs harder to understand, not easier.

Reviewer 2: I think the problem is that we didn't create this idea. It already existed for things like babel configs - and has been called "package boundary" for years. https://github.com/babel/website/blame/master/docs/config-files.md

So, I think it makes sense to align with existing usage here.

Author: This was a specific change request in the previous PR from @isaacs that the term "scope" conflicts with npm scopes.

Reviewer: > babel/website@`master`/docs/config-files.md (blame)

The only mention of "package boundary" I can find there is this:

> These cases will primarily cause issues for users with a monorepo structure, because if you have [example] the config will now be entirely ignored, because it is across a package boundary.

This usage of “package boundary” corresponds with how I understand the term: a border _between_ packages. It’s not a synonym for the contents of the package, or a drop-in replacement for “package scope.” If we use the phrase “package boundary” at all, it should be in this sense, the way Babel uses the phrase.

“Package scope” refers not to a border but to an _area_—the space contained within the borders/boundaries. This makes more sense for us because we’re describing things like “the `.js` files in the package scope.” You _could_ describe things between boundaries in such terms, like “the cities within the nation’s borders,” or you could be more direct with a phrase like “the cities in the nation.”

One thing we _can_ do, certainly, is minimize our usage of either phrase “package scope” or “package boundary.” The phrase “parent `package.json`“ is clearer than either “the controlling package scope `package.json`“ or “the controlling package boundary `package.json`.” The latter two both rely on jargon, a term that the reader might not know, that we ourselves need to define earlier in the document (for either “scope” or “boundary.”) I would be fine with a revision to our docs that finds other mentions of “package scope” and similarly rewrites them into clearer, non-jargon reliant alternatives. But we shouldn’t prefer “package boundary” over “package scope,” if we even need to mention package boundaries at all.

Author: > I would be fine with a revision to our docs that finds other mentions of “package scope” and similarly rewrites them into clearer, non-jargon reliant alternatives. But we shouldn’t prefer “package boundary” over “package scope,” if we even need to mention package boundaries at all.

@GeoffreyBooth this PR is exactly renaming all uses of "package scope" to instead refer to the "package boundary". There aren't any others in the docs.

Would it help if we ensure that we mention the boundary specifically instead of the area. For example we do this already in phrases like "the package.json file for the package boundary". We could ensure to use phrasing like that instead. Let me know if that might work for you.

Reviewer: > this PR is exactly renaming all uses of “package scope” to instead refer to the “package boundary”

I know, this is the problem. The terms are not interchangeable, just as you can’t replace “nation” with “border.” They’re related, sure, but distinct.

If you want to address the concern about avoiding confusion with `npm` scope being a similar term, I think all we need to do is find all references to “package scope” and rewrite as many of them as possible to use descriptive language that avoids jargon (so neither “scope” nor “boundary” phrases). So sentences like “Files ending with `.mjs` are always loaded as ES modules regardless of package scope” could be written like “Files ending with `.mjs` are always loaded as ES modules regardless of the `"type"` field in the nearest parent `package.json`.” That’s clearer than using either “scope” or “boundary.”

We should probably keep the reference to package scope where it’s initially defined, and we could link all references to “nearest parent `package.json`“ and similar to the section where we introduce the package scope concept, since that section has the extra detail about how either `package.json` files or `node_modules` folders define the boundaries around scopes.

Author: @GeoffreyBooth the point is to deprecate the term package scope entirely. So we cannot then have a section on "package scopes". Are you proposing we do not replace it with anything new then? What shall we call this section instead?

Reviewer: > the point is to deprecate the term package scope entirely

If that is your goal then I am strongly opposed.

Author: I have no goals here other than to get this merged so we can release this docs change.

In particular I am addressing [this comment](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/34748#discussion_r478566608) from @isaacs here.

In that comment he suggests using the term "package context". Would you be happier with that?

Alternatively we can also decide it is too late to change this terminology and simply stick with package scope certainly.

Reviewer: Sorry, my last comment was too harsh, and then you replied before I could elaborate.

Do you mind reverting all the “package boundary” changes and I’ll take a crack at proposing suggestions to remove or minimize all mentions of “package scope”? Basically I want to keep wherever the text currently has “nearest parent `package.json`,” as I think that’s better than any of these alternatives, and I want to see if I can think of better phrasing for the few other mentions of “package scope.” My goal would be to rewrite it without just swapping in a replacement phrase that’s similarly unknown to readers.

Author: @GeoffreyBooth sure I've reverted all cases that previously referred to nearest parent and left just renames of "package scope" to "package boundary".

it will also make things easier for build tools and loaders to determine how the
files in the package should be interpreted.

> ### Package boundaries and file extensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `package.json` and file extensions
```

A folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that folder
until the next folder containing another [`package.json`][], are a
_package boundary_. Package boundaries do not carry through `node_modules`
folders, which are effectively treated as if they contained an empty

> `package.json`.

Reviewer: We can just delete this whole paragraph. (The suggest tool won’t let me propose this.)

> _package boundary_. Package boundaries do not carry through `node_modules`
> folders, which are effectively treated as if they contained an empty
> `package.json`.
> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

> Within a package boundary, the [`package.json`][] [`"type"`][] field defines how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within a package, the [`package.json`][] [`"type"`][] field defines how
```

Node.js should interpret `.js` files. If a `package.json` file does not have a
`"type"` field, `.js` files are treated as [CommonJS][].

A `package.json` `"type"` value of `"module"` tells Node.js to interpret `.js`

> files within that package boundary as using [ES module][] syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
files within that package as using [ES module][] syntax.
```

> The package boundary applies not only to initial entry points (`node my-app.js`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `"type"` field applies not only to initial entry points (`node my-app.js`)
```

but also to files referenced by `import` statements and `import()` expressions.

```js

> // my-app.js, in an ES module package boundary because there is a package.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// my-app.js, treated as an ES module because there is a package.json
```

// file in the same folder with "type": "module".

import './startup/init.js';
// Loaded as ES module since ./startup contains no package.json file,

> // and therefore inherits the ES module package boundary from one level up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// and therefore inherits the "type" value from one level up.
```

```

Files ending with `.mjs` are always loaded as [ES modules][] regardless of

> package boundary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the nearest parent `package.json`.
```

> Files ending with `.cjs` are always loaded as [CommonJS][] regardless of package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Files ending with `.cjs` are always loaded as [CommonJS][] regardless of the
nearest parent `package.json`.
```

(Suggest tool won’t let me include the following line, make sure to delete the orphaned “boundary”.)

```

The `.mjs` and `.cjs` extensions may be used to mix types within the same

> package boundary:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
package:
```

> * Within a `"type": "module"` package boundary, Node.js can be instructed to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Within a `"type": "module"` package, Node.js can be instructed to
```

  interpret a particular file as [CommonJS][] by naming it with a `.cjs`
  extension (since both `.js` and `.mjs` files are treated as ES modules within

>   a `"module"` package boundary).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a `"module"` package).
```

> * Within a `"type": "commonjs"` package boundary, Node.js can be instructed to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Within a `"type": "commonjs"` package, Node.js can be instructed to
```

  interpret a particular file as an [ES module][] by naming it with an `.mjs`
  extension (since both `.js` and `.cjs` files are treated as CommonJS within a

>   `"commonjs"` package boundary).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `"commonjs"` package).
```

}
```

> When defining the [`"exports"`][] field, all subpaths of the package will be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When defining the [`"exports"`][] field, all subpaths of the package are
```

...or perhaps:

```suggestion
When the [`"exports"`][] field is defined, all subpaths of the package are
```

encapsulated and no longer available to importers. For example,

> `require('pkg/subpath.js')` would throw an [`ERR_PACKAGE_PATH_NOT_EXPORTED`][]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`require('pkg/subpath.js')` throws an [`ERR_PACKAGE_PATH_NOT_EXPORTED`][]
```

}
```

> When defining the [`"exports"`][] field all subpaths of the package will be

Reviewer 4: nit: I would put a comma here to improve readability, feel free to disregard though.

```suggestion
When defining the [`"exports"`][] field, all subpaths of the package will be
```

encapsulated and no longer available to importers. For example,

> `require('pkg/subpath.js')` would throw a new "Package Path Not Exported" error.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`require('pkg/subpath.js')` would throw a [`ERR_PACKAGE_PATH_NOT_EXPORTED`][] error.
```

files within the package. Because `node_modules` paths are forbidden in exports
targets, this expansion is dependent on only the files of the package itself.

### Package exports fallbacks

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

For possible new specifier support in future, array fallbacks are
supported for all invalid specifiers:

```json
{
  "exports": {
    "./submodule": ["not:valid", "./submodule.js"]
  }
}
```

Since `"not:valid"` is not a valid specifier, `"./submodule.js"` is used
instead as the fallback, as if it were the only target.

> 

Author: As per @isaacs's comment this also removes documentation on package fallbacks. This may or may not be controversial to the modules group though but I tend to agree with the sentiment of simplifying the outward documentation for this already-complex field.

would be usable by any version of Node.js, since `import` can refer to CommonJS
files; but it would not provide any of the advantages of using ES module syntax.

A package could also switch from CommonJS to ES module syntax in a [breaking
change](https://semver.org/) version bump. This has the disadvantage that the
newest version of the package would only be usable in ES module-supporting

> versions of Node.js.

Reviewer 4: Should we add a note to help users find the relevant info? Somebody who's new to Node.js may ask themself what are the ESM-supporting versions.
That could go in a separate PR as I see there is no `History` section at the top of `esm.md`.

Author: It sounds like a section on compatibility via a new PR would be useful to users actually. Perhaps esm.md could get a history or we could add a module compatibility section that mentions what levels of ESM support can be expected where.

Reviewer 4: We would probably need a reference to the support table if https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/35395 lands.

as [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/creating-a-package-json-file)) may use
additional fields which are ignored by Node.js and not documented here.

The following fields in `package.json` files are used in Node.js:

* [`"name"`][] - Relevant when using named imports within a package. Also used
  by package managers as the name of the package.
* [`"type"`][] - The package type determining whether to load `.js` files as
  CommonJS or ES modules.
* [`"exports"`][] - Package exports and conditional exports. When present,

>   limits which submodules may be loaded from within the package.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  limits which submodules can be loaded from within the package.
```

as [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/creating-a-package-json-file)) may use
additional fields which are ignored by Node.js and not documented here.

The following fields in `package.json` files are relevant to the Node.js module

> loading system, and are described in detail below.

Reviewer: Not just relevant, aren’t these the only fields that Node recognizes?

Author: Yes, I've simplified this line.

* Type: {string}

The `"type"` field defines the module format that Node.js will use for all

> `.js` files that have that `package.json` file as their [package boundary][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`.js` files that have that `package.json` file as their nearest parent
`package.json`.
```

node my-app.js # Runs as ES module
```

> If no `package.json` is found once the volume root is reached, or if the nearest
> parent `package.json` lacks a `"type"` field, or contains `"type": "commonjs"`,
> `.js` files are treated as [CommonJS][].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If no `package.json` is found once the volume root is reached, or if the package
boundary `package.json` lacks a `"type"` field, or contains `"type": "commonjs"`,
`.js` files are treated as [CommonJS][].
```

node my-app.js # Runs as ES module
```

> If no `package.json` is found once the volume root is reached, or if the nearest
> parent `package.json` lacks a `"type"` field, or contains `"type": "commonjs"`,
> `.js` files are treated as [CommonJS][].

Reviewer: “if this or this or this, something” is awkward.

```suggestion
If the nearest parent `package.json` lacks a `"type"` field, or contains
`"type": "commonjs"`, `.js` files are treated as [CommonJS][]. If the volume
root is reached and no `package.json` is found, `.js` files are treated as
[CommonJS][].
```

`dep-node-native` (including its exports in turn), and instead get the local
file `./dep-polyfill.js` relative to the package in other environments.

Unlike the exports field, import maps permit mapping to external packages,
providing an important use case for conditional loading scenarios.

Apart from the above, the resolution rules for the imports field are otherwise
analogous to the exports field.

[Babel]: https://babeljs.io/
[Conditional exports]: #packages_conditional_exports
[CommonJS]: modules.html
[ES modules]: esm.html
[ES module]: esm.html

> [`esm`]: https://github.com/standard-things/esm#readme

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[`ERR_PACKAGE_PATH_NOT_EXPORTED`]: errors.html#ERR_PACKAGE_PATH_NOT_EXPORTED
[`esm`]: https://github.com/standard-things/esm#readme
```

`dep-node-native` (including its exports in turn), and instead get the local
file `./dep-polyfill.js` relative to the package in other environments.

> Unlike the exports field, import maps permit mapping to external packages,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the `"exports"` field, import maps permit mapping to external packages,
```
?
